# CRUD Operations

Learn how to perform CRUD operations using methods offered by the EntityManager.

> We'll cover the following:
>
> - merge() methods for INSERT and UPDATE queries
> - Executing a query
>   - The show-sql property
>   - find() method for SELECT query
>   - remove() method for DELETE query

The EntityManager offers a large number of methods to perform various queries.  
We will write methods to insert, fetch, update, and delete data.

## merge() methods for INSERT and UPDATE queries

The EntityManager offers a merge() method for both INSERT and UPDATE operations.  
 merge() checks if the primary key value is being passed to it or not. If it finds the primary key, it updates the corresponding record. If the primary key is not passed, it generates a value and inserts a new record in the table. The merge() method returns a Player object.

The logic of insertPlayer() and updatePlayer() methods will be the same.  
The difference lies in the arguments being passed to the merge() method.

        public Player insertPlayer (Player player) {
            return entityManager.merge(player);
        }
        public Player updatePlayer (Player player) {
            return entityManager.merge(player);
        }

The merge() method will create an SQL INSERT or UPDATE query and map values to it from the Player object on its own.  
 It also converts the row returned to a Player object on its own.

## Executing a query

We will use the CommandLineRunner interface to use the run() method.

In order to execute insertPlayer, we will autowire PlayerRepository in the TennisPlayerApplication class and use it to call methods in the run() method as follows:

        @Autowired
        PlayerRepository repo;

        @Override
        public void run(String... args) throws Exception {
            logger.info("\n\n>> Inserting Player: {}\n", repo.insertPlayer(
                    new Player("Djokovic", "Serbia", Date.valueOf("1987-05-22"), 81)));

            logger.info("\n\n>> Inserting Player: {}\n", repo.insertPlayer(
                    new Player("Monfils", "France", Date.valueOf("1986-09-01"), 10)));
        }

This will insert two rows in the Player table. Notice that we are not passing the Id attribute as it will be auto-generated by Hibernate. The insertion can be confirmed from the H2 web console by executing the SELECT \* query. Hibernate has assigned id 1 and 2 to the rows it inserted. The ids would be incremented in sequence if more rows are inserted.

#### The show-sql query

We have inserted two rows in the database without writing any queries. To see the queries that Hibernate has generated, we can enable the show-sql property in the application.properties file as follows:

        spring.jpa.show-sql = true

#### find() method for SELECT query

Another way to confirm insert is to implement the getPlayerById method.  
 This method will return a player based on the primary key value.

EntityManager offers a number of find() methods. We will pick the one that takes the name of the class and the primary key as arguments.

        public Player getPlayerById(int id) {
            return entityManager.find(Player.class, id);
        }

Like the merge() method, the find() method also creates the SQL query and maps values to it on its own. It also converts the row returned to a Player object.

We will call getPlayerById() in the run() method:

        @Override
        public void run(String... args) throws Exception {
            logger.info("\n\n>> Inserting Player: {}\n", repo.insertPlayer(
                    new Player("Djokovic", "Serbia", Date.valueOf("1987-05-22"), 81)));
            logger.info("\n\n>> Inserting Player: {}\n", repo.insertPlayer(
                    new Player("Monfils", "France", Date.valueOf("1986-09-01"), 10)));

            logger.info("\n\n>> Player with id 2: {}\n", repo.getPlayerById(2));
        }

#### remove() method for DELETE query

The remove() method of EntityManager is used to delete a row from the table.

This is a two step process:

- first, we will get the object using the find() method by passing the id of the player.
- Then, we will pass the object to the remove() method. remove() is a void method and does not return anything.

        public void deleteById(int id){
            Player player = entityManager.find(Player.class, id);
            entityManager.remove(player);
        }

When this method is called inside the run() method, we can see the DELETE query generated by Hibernate. The deletion can be confirmed from the H2 console using a SELECT \* query.

JPA makes interacting with databases really simple.  
All it needs is entity definition and mapping, and it takes care of the rest.
